# Joystick-Buzzer

This Arduino project uses a two-axis joystick to control the notes outputted by a piezo buzzer.

To construct our prototype, we started by testing and experimenting with the functionality of the joystick based on ideas others had previously implemented. We attached LED lights to the breadboard, and we set the output of the LEDs to correspond with the directional inputs of the joystick. Once we were able to get this working, we removed the LEDs and began building the circuit with the piezo instead. This was challenging in the beginning since we had to adapt code and circuitry to fit our needs and didn’t have an exact blueprint to follow. Also, our code initially called for the buzzer to play a frequency that was too low to really hear, leading us to believe that our prototype wasn’t working. We experimented with different octaves to understand the limits of our hardware. Our prototype can produce distinguishable sound between octaves 2-8, although octave 2 and octave 8 don't sound very pleasant. Using an output device with broader capability would be an interesting continuation of this project.

The code was more difficult to get correct. We began by setting up resting coordinates, determining the central position of the joystick, and ensuring that no sound was produced when the joystick was at this position. In theory, the coordinates of the center position of the joystick should be (512, 512). However, we noticed that individual joysticks had center positions slightly off from the expectation. It seemed that even knocking the joystick accidentally could affect its center coordinates. In our code, we added the capability to "calibrate" the program to a particular joystick, at least with respect to the center coordinates.

Once we had our circuit, we implemented a four-note program before moving on to eight notes. To get the joystick to control the notes played, we wrote a set of nested if and if-else statements that bounded both the x and the y value of the joystick. The bounds were determined by readings we got from the serial monitor. Through these, we were able to map frequency values to certain notes, setting the piezo buzzer to play at a note’s frequency when the joystick’s x and y values fell into a certain range. Finally, we added a variable denoting the octave of the notes being played, using a frequency multiplier to shift octaves based on the settings within the code. Currently, the octave has to be changed in the code and the program re-uploaded to the Arduino in order to change the octave being played. If we were to expand on/improve this project, we would want to implement the capability to control the octave with a button.

We noticed some interesting noises caused when the position of the joystick straddled the boundary between two notes, which could probably be somewhat remedied by practicing hitting certain positions. One weakness of our code is that the positional ranges for each note aren't uniform in size and are based on a specific joystick. Our project could benefit from a more precise input device. 

Overall, we were able to produce a full eight-note range of function for the piano that could be controlled with the simple movement of a joystick, making the project a success.
